From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Babaro. This is the Daily.
[Music]
During President Trump's first term, the
intentional separation of migrant
children from their parents shocked the
country and persuaded Trump to say that
he would end the practice for good.
But my colleague Mhammed Ali Aziz has
found that in Trump's second term,
family separations are back.
[Music]
[Applause]
It's Thursday, August 7th.
[Music]
Hi,
>> this is the New York Times report.
>> Yes, I'm here with the uh you requested,
sir.
>> Okay, fantastic. Let me get my uh
translator on the uh call.
>> Mohammed, I wonder if you can tell us
about this family that you have been
talking to.
>> Yeah, I have been speaking with this
Russian couple, Fenia and Afghani, for
the past month.
>> Okay. Are you here? Is everybody here?
>> Yeah.
>> Hello.
>> Okay. Wonderful.
>> They're in their 30s. They're from the
Russian city of Vulgrad. And they have
this 8-year-old child, Maxim.
>> I guess I'd like to start, you know, why
come? Why did you want to come to
America?
>> And ofi and walk me through their
family's journey.
They fled Russia because of their
political activism. They were supporters
of Alexi Naval.
>> We were on their watch list and that
made it impossible to stay in our
country
>> and they went to Mexico.
there was a program in place which was
called CBP1 and we were waiting for
about 10 months uh while in Mexico
>> and their desire was to get an
appointment through this app that the
Biden administration had created which
allowed people to come to a port of
entry enter the United States and seek
asylum within the country
>> right and I'm guessing based on what you
said that they were seeking political
asylum based on this adversarial
relationship they had with the Putin
government.
>> Definitely. They they say they were
fleeing for their lives, but while
they're waiting, President Trump is
elected and he closes down CBP1.
>> Mhm.
>> And on January 20th, it's gone.
>> So, what happens to them with this app
gone?
[Music]
So they realize that there's no way to
enter the United States in the way that
they had imagined. So they get inside of
a car with two other Russian families
and they go to a port of entry.
We immediately informed uh that all of
the people who were in the car are
seeking to apply for the political
asylum
>> and says they're there to seek asylum.
But because the Trump administration has
shut down asylum at the southern border
wholly and completely, those options are
not available to them and they are
detained in Border Patrol custody.
[Music]
So every attempt that they've made to
enter the country legally has failed and
now they are in the US in the eyes of
the Trump administration illegally.
>> Yeah. They're ordered deported very
quickly and the government wants to
enforce this deportation order and get
them out of the country.
>> Got it. So what happens once that
deportation order is issued
Yorkia
says that in miday
after they had already spent two weeks
in border patrol custody they were taken
from Border Patrol detention to JFK
airport
>> and then the following day they were
trying to deport us
>> and it's there where Afghania and
Afghani realize that they are being
deported to Russia which is something
that in their eyes is just impossible.
It's something that cannot happen
because of the fear and the threats that
they face back in Russia. So you have
this situation where in Afghania's eyes
when she's in JFK airport she's nervous.
She's fearful of what deportation means
back to her home country and she sees
her husband pleading with the ICE
officials to stop their deportation.
>> We very reasonably explained our
position and explained that we're not
going to fly anywhere.
>> Right. Potentially it's life or death
for them.
>> Exactly. Yeah, it is. It is life or
death for them. And it's at this point
inside the airport where they are first
told of this idea
that since they're refusing their
deportation,
they will be separated from their
8-year-old boy, Maxim, who will go into
government custody.
>> Just explain that. What exactly are they
being told and what rationale is being
given?
Yeah. So, they're taken to a room inside
JFK and it's there where Evania
believes that since they've refused this
deportation, they're going to be
separated from their child for a day or
two, but you have these really intense
scenes.
Well, at first I was actually holding up
pretty well, but then I started to cry.
And when I started to cry, he picked up
and he started to cry, too.
>> Maxim is looking at his parents. He's
confirming with them that it'll only
take a few days. At one point, Evania
says that her last image of her son is
her crying and being told to leave this
room and her looking back at her son and
seeing that he was also crying, but he
had kind of faced his head in a
different direction. And that was the
lasting image that she still has in her
mind of the last time that she saw her
son. And and from there, Maxim is taken
to HHS custody where he's taken to a
child's shelter and the parents are
taken to ICE detention.
[Music]
>> Well, what what happened to what they
understood to be a very shortterm
separation?
>> It wasn't short term. It continues. The
separation continues. And in the days
and weeks after their initial
separation,
Evania is talking to Maxim on the phone.
>> He said that he's sleeping in the same
room with children who don't speak
English and they don't speak Russian and
he doesn't understand them at all. He's
in a shelter for unaccompanied immigrant
children. And she recalls how it was
difficult to actually have this
conversation with their son because he
was crying so much. He was just
relentlessly crying.
>> Maxim is asking his mother,
"When are you getting me out of here?
you know, when are you going to come get
me?
>> He said, "Mama, when are you going to
take me out of here?"
>> And his mother says, "We're working on
it. We'll make it happen."
>> Um, I was trying to explain to him that
we're trying, we're trying to do that.
We're talking to the officers. We're
trying to convince them.
>> But of course, she knows she has no
understanding whether that's realistic.
Well, what is she being told? What are
the border immigration officials telling
her and her husband about her son and
whether they're going to be reunited?
>> Nothing. They have no sense of whether
or not they'll be reunified with their
child. Their attorney actually had
requested from the Trump administration
to detain the family together in an ICE
detention center in Texas. But that
request was not granted.
>> So Hmed, what exactly
do you come to understand has happened
to this family and why they end up in
this pretty tortured state of
limbo and quite obviously separation.
These parents are no longer with their
quite young son.
Well, what I came to understand through
weeks of investigation
coming through case files and internal
documents was that this family was the
face of family separation
in this new form during the second Trump
administration.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Muhammad, you call this a new form of
family separation and of course the
initial form of family separation ended
up being a defining chapter of the first
Trump administration. But what's
different about these family separations
from the family separations of the first
Trump administration? And what's
similar? I guess we may need to go back
to the first version of it.
>> Yeah. If you recall back during the
first Trump administration
in 2018,
the Department of Justice working with
the Department of Homeland Security
enacted this policy where anybody
crossing the border illegally was going
to be charged with illegal entry. And
that included families as well. And as a
result of that prosecution,
thousands of families were separated.
And the whole idea behind these family
separations, you know, taking the the
children from the families was to deter
families from trying to cross into the
country illegally. This was something
that the Trump administration had
struggled with that families were
crossing the border illegally and then
ultimately being released into the
country. And they saw it as this pull
factor, this idea that families knew
that if they crossed into the United
States, they had a free ticket into the
country and this was their solution to
stop that.
>> Right. But the outcry from the public
once the times broke the story that
these separations were happening was
extraordinary.
>> Yeah, definitely.
There were protests.
>> Tens of thousands marched across the
country over immigration.
>> The Pope called it immoral.
>> You had this audio of a young girl
crying for her parents that went viral.
all these different scenes that really
cut through in a way with the American
public turning against this policy.
>> We all should be able to agree that in
the United States of America. We will
not intentionally separate children from
their parents. We will not do that. We
are better than that.
>> And ultimately it went to court. The
ACLU was able to get a judge to block
these separations outside of very
specific scenarios and President Trump
ultimately says, "Okay, we won't do this
anymore." Around the same time in the
summer of 2018,
right? It was one of the few policies
that he genuinely reversed himself on.
As I recall, he signs an executive order
and very publicly says, "I am not going
to do this. People are saying this is
terrible. I hear you. So why would the
second Trump administration bring any
version of this back?
>> Well, the Trump administration has said
that there is no family separation
policy, that they do not separate
families, that there is nothing new
happening here. But I've been looking
through documents and interviewing
families like Ageni and Agenia. And what
I found is that there have been at least
nine families in similar situations.
Families that have refused to be
deported to their home countries for
reasons obviously like Afghania and
Afghani. And when they've refused, when
they've decided not to get on these
planes to be deported, it's at that
point that the government is separating
these families.
>> And why can't the US just force these
families to get on these planes and
leave if there is a deportation order?
There are certain countries that uh ICE
has had difficulty to deport to
regularly and and one of those countries
is Russia. Obviously, there are uh not
the greatest of relations between Russia
and the United States. And as a result,
ICE has to deport Russians primarily
through uh commercial airports and put
them on planes. And as opposed to a
charter flight that ICE is administering
where they can shackle them and arrest
them and and handcuff them and put them
on the plane, the situation on airplanes
is different. And if people refuse to
board or make a scene, the airlines will
not take them. And so ultimately what
the Trump administration is trying to do
here is to separate them for their uh
refusal and continue to try to deport
them. And in their eyes, they believe
that it's a different policy that it's
actually happening not at the southern
border, but inside the United States.
Well, why does that distinction matter
where the separation is occurring? And I
guess that makes me wonder, how does it
relate to the court rulings about that
initial form of separation? Yeah, the
court order in 2018 applied to
separations specifically at the southern
border. Again, these families that are
crossing and as a result are being
separated due to these prosecutions.
And so the court order blocks these
separations of the southern border
outside of a few different scenarios.
You know, somebody's a national security
threat, a public safety threat, or a
danger to their children. In those
circumstances there can be separations
but otherwise there cannot be. But
internally inside ICE they view these
separations as a different form of
separation. We found a case file in fact
in one of these cases where they say
there is no court ramifications or
implications here and that it's a
different form of separation. It's a
interior separation. Hm. So because the
location of the separation
in the country's interior, not at the
border, is defining this new kind of
family separation, the administration is
saying that it's within the bounds of
the law.
>> Exactly. That is the way they discuss it
internally.
>> Okay. So they do acknowledge these
separations are happening.
Well, it is a uh strange kind of
roundabout way of confirming it. They
say they do not do family separation,
but then they say that due to the
family's behaviors and refusing to
comply with this deportation order, HHS
took custody of the children, which of
course is a form of the family being
separated since the child is going from
the parents to HHS custody. And of
course in the internal records there's
the documentation of these separations.
>> Ultimately
this separation
really serves as an accelerant for these
families to decide to leave the country
because you know you can imagine when
given the obvious choice of being
separated from their child or leaving
together as a unit. It's a very
compelling argument to give in and to to
leave the country.
>> What this would seem to suggest is that
the impulse to separate migrant families
has never really gone away inside the
Trump administration.
And yet this second version that you
have found in your reporting only
applied so far to nine families. And I
wonder what you make of that. I mean
that is significantly significantly
smaller than the thousands of families
that went through family separation in
the first term at the border. Yeah, I
have found evidence of this happening to
nine families. Of course, there could be
more. I mean, it's important to know
that I don't have the the number of
families that were faced with this
choice and ultimately decided to leave
the United States,
>> right? Because you're focused on the
families that have decided to stay.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think right now ICE is
under incredible pressure to boost their
deportation numbers. They've gone
through firings of leadership. They've
been told to arrest 3,000 people a day.
The pressure has been relentless.
And in these situations, they are not
going to allow families that simply
refuse to get on deportation flights to
have the ability to be released into the
country and to live their lives and go
through court proceedings. That is not
an option that's going to be afforded to
them simply because they refuse to be
deported. Ultimately, they will continue
to try to deport them and as a result of
their refusal, they will be separated.
>> Mhm. I think that brings us back to the
family that you spent so much time
talking to from Russia.
They have not given in to this pressure
to leave. And so what does that say
about the power of this as a deterrent
and what awaits this family if they
remain separated? I think it just speaks
to how
scared they were to be removed to Russia
that, you know, like they've said
repeatedly,
this was just not a possibility that
they could even imagine happening to
them. They were not going to allow it.
And they've experienced this separation
now for more than 2 months.
>> Wow.
>> And they have not given in. They have
not said, "We will be deported." And
ultimately, they have continued to claim
a fear of Russia. And as a result,
finally, they were given a screening,
you know, trying to determine whether or
not their fear level passed uh the
government's threshold of being a
legitimate fear level of being harmed in
their home country. And they passed that
very high bar that was given to them.
They passed that and now the government
cannot deport this family to Russia
>> which would suggest that their original
claims that they deserve political
asylum in the US contain some level of
credibility.
>> Yeah. But you know at this point the
Trump administration has blocked the
avenues
for asylum. So all that's remaining for
them is this tiny sliver of a chance
that they can avoid deportation to
Russia. But at the end of the day, it
does not mean that they will potentially
stay in the United States and it could
result in them ultimately being moved to
a third country.
>> In the meantime, what has happened to
Maxim, to this 8-year-old boy? Well, he
has since been transferred to foster
care and he's able to regularly speak to
his parents on the phone.
>> And during these conversations, his
father told me that he tries to keep his
son's mind off of this grueling
separation.
I was asking about friends. I was asking
what um interesting things he'd seen or
experienced.
>> And he asks some questions, you know,
like what are some of his favorite
things to eat? What has he done? And one
of the questions that he's asked him is,
"What are your favorite things to do?
>> What are your favorite things to do, you
know, in America? What are you what are
you doing?" And his son responded,
first and most favorite. Well, my
favorite thing to do is to speak with
you and you know my mother. And his his
father said, "Okay, what's your second
favorite thing to do?" And he says,
>> "Because the conversation with you
personally,
>> my second favorite thing to do is to
speak with you alone." And his father
says, "What's your third favorite thing
to do?" And he says,
>> "A conversation with mama.
>> My third favorite thing to do is to
speak with my mother alone." So you can
see obviously through this answer how
focused he is on his parents
and
>> he's recently grown despondent according
to his mother who said that
you know he had been consistently
counting the days that they had been
separated from one another since May.
and he actually stopped doing this
because he feels apathetic at this
point, I think.
>> And recently he stopped counting and he
told his mother on the phone that, you
know, what was the point of counting the
days they'd been separated there? There
didn't seem to be any prospect of them
being together again.
I mean, he sounds like an 8-year-old boy
who desperately needs a hug from his mom
and his dad.
>> Definitely.
>> And his father has been thinking about
the fact that his son is going to turn
nine on August 24th. And
>> on that day, that will be the worst uh
birthday in his life. is going to
experience this birthday separate from
his mother and father and
>> I hope that it will not repeat ever
again in his life.
>> His father said that he hopes that this
is the only time that he has a birthday
away from his parents.
[Music]
Muhammad, thank you very much. We
appreciate Thank you for having me.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know.
Today, President Trump all but declared
economic war against India on Wednesday,
threatening tariffs of up to 50% against
what many view as an ally. After
announcing 25% tariffs on Indian imports
last week, Trump has now tacked on
another 25% to punish India for
purchasing large amounts of Russian oil
at a time when the United States is
trying to force Russia to end its war in
Ukraine. Meanwhile, President Trump said
he would meet with Russian President
Vladimir Putin as soon as next week for
what would be the first in-person summit
between the leaders of both countries
since Russia invaded Ukraine 3 years
ago. The meeting reflects Trump's belief
that a peace deal between Russia and
Ukraine can only be achieved through his
personal persuasion.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Carlos
Prito, Claire Tenniscetter, and Shannon
Lynn. It was edited by Rachel Quester
and Devon Taylor.
Contains original music by Alicia Ba,
Pat McCusker, and Dan Powell, and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our theme
music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Lansk
of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]